Rust smart pointers (#3927)
Codecademy/docs: content/rust/concepts/smart-pointers/smart-pointers.md

Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Pointers'
  - 'Data Structures'
  - 'References'
CatalogContent:
  - 'rust-for-programmers'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

**Smart Pointers** are abstract data types that store memory addresses of variables and have additional metadata and capabilities, such as automatic memory management and bounds checking. The most common smart pointers in Rust include `Box<T>`, `Rc<T>`, as well as `Ref<T>` and `RefMut<T>`, which are accessed through `RefCell<T>`.

## Syntax

### Box&lt;T&gt;

The `Box<T>` smart pointer is used to store data on the heap rather than the stack. All that remains on the stack will be the pointer to the heap data.

```pseudo
let boxed_value: Box<i32> = Box::new(42);
```

### Rc&lt;T&gt;

The `Rc<T>` stands for Reference Counted smart pointer type. This pointer keeps a record of the number of references you have for each variable in your code. When the reference count reaches zero, they are no longer in use, and the smart pointer cleans them up.

```pseudo
use std::rc::Rc;

let shared_value: Rc<i32> = Rc::new(42);
```

### RefCell&lt;T&gt; (Ref&lt;T&gt; and RefMut&lt;T&gt;)

> The `RefCell<T>` is a smart pointer type that executes the borrowing rules at runtime rather than at compile time. RefCell<T> uses a design pattern called "interior mutability", which allows the data to be mutated with immutable references.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `RefCell<T>` is a smart pointer type that enforces borrowing rules at runtime instead of compile time. `RefCell<T>` employs a design pattern called "interior mutability," enabling the mutation of data with immutable references.
```

```pseudo
use std::cell::RefCell;

let mutable_data = RefCell::new(42);
```

## Examples

### Box&lt;T&gt;

```rust
fn main() {
	let stack_data = 10;
	let heap_data = Box::new(stack_data); // Creates pointer to the data in the heap
	println!("Heap Data = {}", heap_data); // Prints output, which will be 10
}
```

> This example results in the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example will result in the following output:
```

```shell
Heap Data = 10
```

### Rc&lt;T&gt;

```rust
use std::rc::Rc;

#[derive(Debug)]
enum Tree {
    Node(i32, Rc<Tree>),
    Leaf,
}

use Tree::{Node, Leaf};

fn main() {
    let first_tree = Rc::new(Node(10, Rc::new(Node(20, Rc::new(Leaf)))));
    println!("The count after creating first_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Output would be 1

    let second_tree = Node(8, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
    println!("The count after creating second_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Output would be 2

    {
        let third_tree = Node(9, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
        println!("The count after creating third_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Output would be 3
    }

    println!("The count after third_tree goes out of scope is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Since third_tree was declared out of scope, the output would be 2
}
```

> This example results in the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example will result in the following output:
```

```shell
The count after creating the first_tree is 1
The count after creating the second_tree is 2
The count after creating the third_tree is 3
The count after third_tree goes out of scope is 2
```

### RefCell&lt;T&gt; (Ref&lt;T&gt; and RefMut&lt;T&gt;)

```rust
use std::cell::RefCell;

fn main() {
    // Create a mutable data cell with an initial value of 42
    let data = RefCell::new(42);

    // Borrow the mutable data and update its value
    *data.borrow_mut() = 50;

    // Borrow the data immutably and print its value
    println!("Updated data value: {}", *data.borrow());
}
```

> This example results in the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example will result in the following output:
```

---
Title: 'Smart Pointers'
Description: 'Smart Pointers are abstract data types that simulate pointers while providing additional features.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Pointers'
  - 'Data Structures'
  - 'References'
CatalogContent:
  - 'rust-for-programmers'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

**Smart Pointers** are abstract data types that store memory addresses of variables and have additional metadata and capabilities, such as automatic memory management and bounds checking. The most common smart pointers in Rust include `Box<T>`, `Rc<T>`, as well as `Ref<T>` and `RefMut<T>`, which are accessed through `RefCell<T>`.

## Syntax

> ### Box&lt;T&gt;

Reviewer: use a better heading name

The `Box<T>` smart pointer is used to store data on the heap rather than the stack. All that remains on the stack is the pointer to the heap data.

```pseudo
let boxed_value: Box<i32> = Box::new(42);
```

> - `boxed_value` in the example above is a variable of type `Box<i32>`. The result is a heap-allocated box that contains an Integer with the value of 42;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **boxed_value:** It is a variable of type `Box<i32>`. The result is a heap-allocated box that contains an Integer with the value of 42;
```

> ### Rc&lt;T&gt;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reference Counted Smart Pointer Type
```

> ### Reference Counted Smart Pointer Type;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reference Counted Smart Pointer Type
```

> The `Rc<T>` stands for Reference Counted smart pointer type. This pointer keeps track of the number of references to each variable in your code. When the reference count reaches zero, indicating that they are no longer in use, and the smart pointer cleans them up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Rc<T>` stands for Reference Counted smart pointer type. This pointer keeps track of the number of references to each variable in the code. When the reference count reaches zero, indicating they are no longer in use, the smart pointer cleans them up.
```

```pseudo

> use std::rc::Rc;
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
no need to show libs in pseudo codes

let shared_value: Rc<i32> = Rc::new(42);
```

> - `shared_value` in the example above is a variable of type `Rc<i32>`. The result is a heap-allocated reference-counted smart pointer that contains an Integer with the value of 42;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **hared_value:** It is a variable of type `Rc<i32>`. The result is a heap-allocated reference-counted smart pointer that contains an Integer with the value of 42;
```

> ### RefCell&lt;T&gt; (Ref&lt;T&gt; and RefMut&lt;T&gt;)

Reviewer: use a better heading name

The `RefCell<T>` is a smart pointer type that enforces borrowing rules at runtime instead of compile time. `RefCell<T>` employs a design pattern called "interior mutability," enabling the mutation of data with immutable references.

```pseudo

> use std::cell::RefCell;
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

let mutable_data = RefCell::new(42);
```

> - `mutable_data` in the example above is a variable of type `RefCell<i32>`. The result is an instance of the `RefCell<T>` smart pointer, which provides interior mutability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **mutable_data:** t is a variable of type `RefCell<i32>`. The result is an instance of the `RefCell<T>` smart pointer, which provides interior mutability.
```

## Examples

> ### Box&lt;T&gt;

Reviewer: use a better heading name

```rust

> fn main() {
> 	let stack_data = 10;
> 	let heap_data = Box::new(stack_data); // Creates pointer to the data in the heap
> 	println!("Heap Data = {}", heap_data); // Prints output, which will be 10
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn main() {
  let stack_data = 10;
  let heap_data = Box::new(stack_data); // Creates pointer to the data in the heap
  println!("Heap Data = {}", heap_data); // Prints output, which will be 10
}
```

```

The above example will result in the following output:

```shell
Heap Data = 10
```

### Rc&lt;T&gt;

```rust

> use std::rc::Rc;
> 
> #[derive(Debug)]
> enum Tree {
>     Node(i32, Rc<Tree>),
>     Leaf,
> }
> 
> use Tree::{Node, Leaf};
> 
> fn main() {
>     let first_tree = Rc::new(Node(10, Rc::new(Node(20, Rc::new(Leaf)))));
>     println!("The count after creating first_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));
> 
>     let second_tree = Node(8, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
>     println!("The count after creating second_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));
> 
>     {
>         let third_tree = Node(9, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
>         println!("The count after creating third_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));
>     }
> 
>     println!("The count after third_tree goes out of scope is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use std::rc::Rc;

#[derive(Debug)]
enum Tree {
  Node(i32, Rc<Tree>),
  Leaf,
}

use Tree::{Node, Leaf};

fn main() {
  let first_tree = Rc::new(Node(10, Rc::new(Node(20, Rc::new(Leaf)))));
  println!("The count after creating first_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));

  let second_tree = Node(8, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
  println!("The count after creating second_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));

  {
      let third_tree = Node(9, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
      println!("The count after creating third_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));
  }

  println!("The count after third_tree goes out of scope is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree));
}
```

> fn main() {
>     let first_tree = Rc::new(Node(10, Rc::new(Node(20, Rc::new(Leaf)))));
>     println!("The count after creating first_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Output would be 1
> 
>     let second_tree = Node(8, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
>     println!("The count after creating second_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Output would be 2
> 
>     {
>         let third_tree = Node(9, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
>         println!("The count after creating third_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Output would be 3
>     }
> 
>     println!("The count after third_tree goes out of scope is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); // Since third_tree was declared out of scope, the output would be 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn main() {
    let first_tree = Rc::new(Node(10, Rc::new(Node(20, Rc::new(Leaf)))));
    println!("The count after creating first_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); 

    let second_tree = Node(8, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
    println!("The count after creating second_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); 

    {
        let third_tree = Node(9, Rc::clone(&first_tree));
        println!("The count after creating third_tree is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); 
    }

    println!("The count after third_tree goes out of scope is {}", Rc::strong_count(&first_tree)); 
```

```

The above example will result in the following output:

```shell
The count after creating the first_tree is 1
The count after creating the second_tree is 2
The count after creating the third_tree is 3
The count after third_tree goes out of scope is 2
```

> ### RefCell&lt;T&gt; (Ref&lt;T&gt; and RefMut&lt;T&gt;)

Reviewer: use a better heading name

```rust

> use std::cell::RefCell;
> 
> fn main() {
>     // Create a mutable data cell with an initial value of 42
>     let data = RefCell::new(42);
> 
>     // Borrow the mutable data and update its value
>     *data.borrow_mut() = 50;
> 
>     // Borrow the data immutably and print its value
>     println!("Updated data value: {}", *data.borrow());
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use std::cell::RefCell;

fn main() {
  // Create a mutable data cell with an initial value of 42
  let data = RefCell::new(42);

  // Borrow the mutable data and update its value
  *data.borrow_mut() = 50;

  // Borrow the data immutably and print its value
  println!("Updated data value: {}", *data.borrow());
}
```
